---
title: 'ReFreshFQ: A GUI based tool for the preprocessing of FASTQ files'
tags:  
  - Python
  - fastq
  - genomics
  - docker
authors:
  - name: Suheel Yousuf Wani
    orcid: 0000-0002-3793-3504
    affiliation: 1,2
  - name: Mohanad A. Ibrahim 
    orcid: 0000-0002-8282-6169
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Faisal M. Alsubaie
    orcid: 0000-0002-2586-7765
    email: iamfaisal77@gmail.com
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Abdul Wahid 
    orcid: 0000-0002-8282-6169
    affiliation: 2
  affiliations:
  - name: Department of Genome, Ministry of Environment Water & Agriculture, Riyadh, KSA
    index: 1
  - name: Department of CS&IT, Maulana Azad National Urdu University, Hyderabad, India
     index: 2
date: 25 July 2022  
bibliography: paper.bib
---

# Summary
In Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) data analyses, some primary preprocessing of sequences data is needed before these sequences go for analysis in different tools or pipelines. These manipulations or preprocessing tasks includes finding a particular sequence pattern, changing file format , statistics of data within files, merging of files, per read quality control(QC), adapter trimming, quality filtering, per-read quality cutting etc. To ease these tasks, we developed a Graphical User Interface (GUI) based software suite that will help the scientists and researchers in manipulations of FASTQ files with ease. The ReFreshFQ is a containerized tool that makes it easy-to-install and easy-to-run. 

# Statement of need
Fastq has become a common file format for sharing sequencing read data combining both the sequence and an associated per base quality score(Cock et al., 2009)(Ewing & Green, 1998) (Huang et al., 2012).Although there is no defined standard for FASTQ files,(Cock et al., 2009) provide a good overview of the format, and provide as close to a ‘standard’ as is available(Cock et al., 2009).
Before fastq files goes for analysis (e.g. Alignment), manipulation of these fastq files are needed for efficient analysis. The manipulation tasks like finding a particular sequence pattern, changing file format , statistics of data within files, merging of files, quality control, adapter trimming, quality filtering, per-read quality cutting are much more frequent when data are being re-used in novel analyses. Mostly researchers or scientist write scripts in some programming language like perl or python to perform these basic manipulations tasks. There are many software tools (e.g. fastp, fqtools) available in the market for manipulations of fastq files before it goes for down streaming. But none of these tools provide easy way to perform these manipulations that will be required for the most analysis. Most of these available fastq preprocessing tools don’t have graphical user interface and depends on many dependencies, hence makes these tools very hard to install and use. For non-computer affine colleagues like pure biologists, to install and start these tools on the command-line often is a problem. Providing a Graphical User-Interface (GUI) for such kind of tasks is a step towards more effective interdisciplinary work.



ReFreshFQ can do following tasks on fastq files.
    • Basic file statistics like count FASTQ file reads, average FASTQ read lengths, GC% etc.
    • Find FASTQ reads containing specific sequences.
    • View FASTQ files with different options like show first ten reads, show last ten reads, show reads within range, show sequence data only, show header data only, show quality data only, view in fasta format.
    • Trimming off primer sequences.
    • Merge two fastq files.
    • Subtract one fastq file from another fastq file.
    • Trim reads that has low quality score.
    • Explain statistics of fastq files by generating graphs. 
    • Validate fastq file.
#Implementation:
We have a developed a GUI based bioinformatics tool for preprocessing of FASTQ files. Most of the available fastq preprocessing tools don’t have graphical user interface and depends on many dependencies, hence makes these tools very hard to install and use. For non-computer affine colleagues to install and start these tools on the command-Line often is a problem. Providing a Graphical User-Interface (GUI) for such kind of tasks is a step towards more effective interdisciplinary work. The ReFreshFQ can parse both plain and gzip-compressed data. The output files generated by this tool can be the input to different computational pipelines.